A Case for Inspector Lal
I met Inspector Keemat Lal about two years ago, while I was living in the hot, dusty town of
Shahpur in the plains of northern India.
Keemat Lal had charge of the local police station. He was a heavily built man, slow and rather
ponderous, and inclined to be lazy; but, like most lazy people, he was intelligent. He was also a
failure. He had remained an Inspector for a number of years, and had given up all hope of further
promotion. His luck was against him, he said. He should never have been a policeman. He had been
born under the sign of Capricorn and should really have gone into the restaurant business; but now it
was too late to do anything about it.
The Inspector and I had little in common. He was nearing forty, and I was twenty-five. But both of
us spoke English, and in Shahpur there were very few people who did. In addition, we were both
fond of beer. There were no places of entertainment in Shahpur. The searing heat, the dust that came
whirling up from the east, the mosquitoes (almost as numerous as the flies), and the general monotony
gave one a thirst for something more substantial than stale lemonade.
My house was on the outskirts of the town, where we were not often disturbed. On two or three
evenings in the week, just as the sun was going down and making it possible for one to emerge from
the khas-cooled confines of a dark, high-ceilinged bedroom, Inspector Keemat Lal would appear on
the verandah steps, mopping the sweat from his face with a small towel, which he used instead of a
handkerchief. My only servant, excited at the prospect of serving an Inspector of Police, would hurry
out with glasses, a bucket of ice and several bottles of the best Indian beer.
One evening, after we had overtaken our fourth bottle, I said, ‘You must have had some interesting
cases in your career, Inspector.’
‘Most of them were rather dull,’ he said. ‘At least the successful ones were. The sensational cases
usually went unsolved — otherwise I might have been a Superintendent by now. I suppose you are
talking of murder cases. Do you remember the shooting of the Minister of the Interior? I was on that
one, but it was a political murder and we never solved it.’
‘Tell me about a case you solved,’ I said. ‘An interesting one.’ When I saw him looking
uncomfortable, I added, ‘You don’t have to worry, Inspector. I’m a very discreet person, in spite of
all the beer I consume.’
‘But how can you be discreet? You are a writer.’
I protested: ‘Writers are usually very discreet. They always change the names of people and
places.’
He gave me one of his rare smiles. ‘And how would you describe me, if you were to put me into a
story?’
‘Oh, I’d leave you as you are. No one would believe in you, anyway.’
He laughed indulgently and poured out more beer. ‘I suppose I can change names, too … I will tell
you of a very interesting case. The victim was an unusual person, and so was the killer. But you must
promise not to write this story.’
‘I promise,’ I lied.
‘Do you know Panauli?’
‘In the hills? Yes, I have been there once or twice.’
‘Good, then you will follow me without my having to be too descriptive. This happened about
three years ago, shortly after I had been stationed at Panauli. Nothing much ever happened there.
There were a few cases of theft and cheating, and an occasional fight during the summer. A murder
took place about once every ten years. It was therefore quite an event when the Rani of—was found
dead in her sitting-room, her head split open by an axe. I knew that I would have to solve the case if I
wanted to stay in Panauli.’
‘The trouble was, anyone could have killed the Rani, and there were some who made no secret of
their satisfaction that she was dead. She had been an unpopular woman. Her husband was dead, her
children were scattered, and her money — for she had never been a very wealthy Rani — had been
dwindling away. She lived alone in an old house on the outskirts of the town, ruling the locality with
the stern authority of a matriarch. She had a servant, and he was the man who found the body and
came to the police, dithering and tongue-tied. I arrested him at once, of course. I knew he was
probably innocent, but a basic rule is to grab the first man on the scene of the crime, especially if he
happens to be a servant. But we let him go after a beating. There was nothing much he could tell us,
and he had a sound alibi.’
‘The axe with which the Rani had been killed must have been a small woodcutter’s axe — so we
deduced from the wound. We couldn’t find the weapon. It might have been used by a man or a woman,
and there were several of both sexes who had a grudge against the Rani. There were bazaar rumours
that she had been supplementing her income by trafficking in young women: she had the necessary
connections. There were also rumours that she possessed vast wealth, and that it was stored away in
her godowns. We did not find any treasure. There were so many rumours darting about like battered
shuttlecocks that I decided to stop wasting my time in trying to follow them up. Instead I restricted my
enquiries to those people who had been close to the Rani — either in their personal relationships or
in actual physical proximity.’
‘To begin with, there was Mr. Kapur, a wealthy businessman from Bombay who had a house in
Panauli. He was supposed to be an old admirer of the Rani’s. I discovered that he had occasionally
lent her money, and that, in spite of his professed friendship for her, he had charged a high rate of
interest.’
‘Then there were her immediate neighbours — an American missionary and his wife, who had
been trying to convert the Rani to Christianity; an English spinster of seventy who made no secret of
the fact that she and the Rani had hated each other with great enthusiasm; a local councillor and his
family, who did not get on well with their aristocratic neighbour; and a tailor, who kept his shop close
by. None of these people had any powerful motive for killing the Rani — or none that I could
discover. But the tailor’s daughter interested me.’
‘Her name was Kusum. She was twelve or thirteen years old — a thin dark girl, with lovely black
eyes and a swift, disarming smile. While I was making my routine enquiries in the vicinity of the
Rani’s house, I noticed that the girl always tried to avoid me. When I questioned her about the Rani,
and about her own movements on the day of the crime, she pretended to be very vague and stupid.’
‘But I could see she was not stupid, and I became convinced that she knew something unusual about
the Rani. She might even know something about the murder. She could have been protecting someone,
and was afraid to tell me what she knew. Often, when I spoke to her of the violence of the Rani’s
death, I saw fear in her eyes. I began to think the girl’s life might be in danger, and I had a close watch
kept on her. I liked her. I liked her youth and freshness. and the innocence and wonder in her eyes. I
spoke to her whenever I could, kindly and paternally, and though I knew she rather liked me and found
me amusing — the ups and downs of Panauli always left me panting for breath — and though I could
see that she wanted to tell me something, she always held back at the last moment.’
‘Then, one afternoon while I was in the Rani’s house going through her effects, I saw something
glistening in a narrow crack near the door-step. I would not have noticed it if the sun had not been
pouring through the window, glinting off the little object. I stooped and picked up a piece of glass. It
was part of a broken bangle.’
‘I turned the fragment over in my hand. There was something familiar about its colour and design.
Didn’t Kusum wear similar glass bangles? I went to look for the girl but she was not at her father’s
shop. I was told that she had gone down the hill, to gather firewood.’
‘I decided to take the narrow path down the hill. It went round some rocks and cactus, and then
disappeared into a forest of oak trees. I found Kusum sitting at the edge of the forest, a bundle of
twigs beside her.’
‘You are always wandering about alone,’ I said. ‘Don’t you feel afraid?’
‘It is safer when I am alone,’she replied. ‘Nobody comes here.’
‘I glanced quickly at the bangles on her wrist, and noticed that their colour matched that of broken
piece. I held out the bit of broken glass and said, ‘I found it in the Rani’s house. It must have fallen
…’
‘She did not wait for me to finish what I was saying. With a look of terror, she sprang up from the
grass and fled into the forest.’
‘I was completely taken aback. I had not expected such a reaction. Of what significance was the
broken bangle? I hurried after the girl, slipping on the smooth pine needles that covered the slopes. I
was searching amongst the trees when I heard someone sobbing behind me. When I turned round, I
saw the girl standing on a boulder, facing me with an axe in her hands.’
‘When Kusum saw me staring at her, she raised the axe and rushed down the slope towards me.’
‘I was too bewildered to be able to do anything but stare with open mouth as she rushed at me with
the axe. The impetus of her run would have brought her right up against me, and the axe, coming
down, would probably have crushed my skull, thick though it is. But while she was still six feet from
me, the axe flew out of her hands. It sprang into the air as though it had a life of its own and came
curving towards me.’
‘In spite of my weight, I moved swiftly aside. The axe grazed my shoulder and sank into the soft
bark of the tree behind me. And Kusum dropped at my feet, weeping hysterically.’
Inspector Keemat Lal paused in order to replenish his glass. He took a long pull at the beer, and the
froth glistened on his moustache.
‘And then what happened?’ I prompted him.
‘Perhaps it could only have happened in India — and to a person like me,’ he said. ‘This sudden
compassion for the person you are supposed to destroy. Instead of being furious and outraged, instead
of seizing the girl and marching her off to the police station, I stroked her head and said silly
comforting things.’
‘And she told you that she had killed the Rani?’
‘She told me how the Rani had called her to her house and given her tea and sweets. Mr. Kapur had
been there. After some time he began stroking Kusum’s arms and squeezing her knees. She had drawn
away, but Kapur kept pawing her. The Rani was telling Kusum not to be afraid, that no harm would
come to her. Kusum slipped away from the man and made a rush for the door. The Rani caught her by
the shoulders and pushed her back into the room. The Rani was getting angry. Kusum saw the axe
lying in a corner of the room. She seized it, raised it above her head and threatened Kapur. The man
realised that he had gone too far, and, valuing his neck, backed away. But the Rani, in a great rage,
sprang at the girl. And Kusum, in desperation and panic, brought the axe down across the Rani’s
head.’
‘The Rani fell to the ground. Without waiting to see what Kapur might do, Kusum fled from the
house. Her bangle must have broken when she stumbled against the door. She ran into the forest and,
after concealing the axe amongst some tall ferns, lay weeping on the grass until it grew dark. But such
was her nature, and such the resilience of youth, that she recovered sufficiently to be able to return
home looking her normal self. And during the following days she managed to remain silent about the
whole business.’
‘What did you do about it?’ I asked.
Keemat lal looked me straight in my berry eye.
‘Nothing,’ he said. ‘I did absolutely nothing. I couldn’t have the girl put away in a remand home. It
would have crushed her spirit.’
‘And what about Kapur?’
‘Oh, he had his own reasons for remaining quiet, as you may guess. No, the case was closed — or
perhaps I should say the file was put in my pending tray. My promotion, too, went into the pending
tray.’
‘It didn’t turn out very well for you,’ I said.
‘No. Here I am in Shahpur, and still an Inspector. But, tell me, what would you have done if you
had been in my place?’
I considered his question carefully for a moment or two, then said, ‘I suppose it would have
depended on how much sympathy the girl evoked in me. She had killed in innocence …’
‘Then you would have put your personal feelings above your duty to uphold the law?’
‘Yes. But I would not have made a very good policeman.’
‘Exactly.’
‘Still, it’s a pity that Kapur got off so easily.’
‘There was no alternative if I was to let the girl go. But he didn’t get off altogether. He found
himself in trouble later on for swindling some manufacturing concern, and went to jail for a couple of
years.’
‘And the girl — did you see her again?’
‘Well, before I was transferred from Panauli, I saw her occasionally on the road. She was usually
on her way to school. She would greet me with joined palms, and call me Uncle.’
The beer bottles were all empty, and Inspector Keemat Lal got up to leave. His final words to me
were, ‘I should never have been a policeman.’
